---
layout: post
title: Why Blog?
tags: [ serious, meta, personal, walls-of-text ]
---
* * *
This writeup is a delightfully meta (to me) exploration of writing and my motivation,
and I'm interested to see how it goes.

Note: Most of the first section was written at some point in early 2019, I'm
publishing it now with only a few changes. The second part is recent, and
outlines the motivation for starting to blog again.

I hope reading this clarifies my motivation in writing publicly, and what I hope
to achieve.

## Why write?

Where I attempt to write down what drives me to write things down.

### Organization

I find writing extremely helpful in organizing my thoughts. After a long day of
firefighting, or context switching, an hour spent writing about my thoughts
allows me the space to focus on moving forward instead of struggling to stay
afloat. It provides a way to condense my learnings instead of letting the
lessons learnt every day to fade away into half forgotten thoughts and ideas.

Instead of running through partially completed thoughts, catching threads and
jumping from one idea to another, I get time and space to explore them one at a
time, mull them over, and grow my comfort level with them. I've noticed that
most of understanding is about growing more comfortable with ideas, and letting
them guide your intuition by building a network of thoughts and patterns - what
some people seem to understand as [mental models](https://fs.blog/mental-models/) or [implicit cognition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Implicit_cognition).

My habit of journaling also forms the base for how I plan long term, beyond
thoughts of the next day. Having consistent ideas and plans, and being able to
note them down provides a clarity of thought that helps in decision making.

### Awarenes

This clarity builds up in another important direction I want to grow in,
awareness.

I realized a few years ago that I have a long way to go before I'm comfortable
with my awareness of my thoughts and emotion. Not having clarity of thought and
desire is a state that prevents me from making any improvement, and improving is
how I can reach goals and fulfill my desires.

To gain this awareness, I need to actively understand my thoughts, emotions and
motivations over long periods of time, and through that, gain an understanding
of what my values are. This is a skill I greatly admire in people around me, and
some of the people closest to me have inspired me to spend a great deal of
effort to grow my awareness.

Perhaps a part of this lack of awareness can be attributed to my methods of
escaping from anxiety and stress, which seem so incredibly effective in keeping
me happy. They helped at a time when they were needed, and now it falls to me to
fill in the gaps, which I'm only happy to do.

Journaling creates daily time that is set aside for introspection, and over time
I gain awareness by noting my reactions to various things during the day, and
I'm able to direct my efforts into growing in the direction that I want, rather
than letting my environment take me where it does.

Reading older entries also shows me how my ideas and attitudes have changed over
time, fueling further understanding and opportunities to course correct.

### Expression

Undeniably, writing is a way for me to express things that I am unable to
otherwise.

Thoughts, ideals, motivations, grand plans, all of them running through my head
for years, never seeing the light of a conversation shine on them. My journals
are full of things I've not spoken of to anyone, and may never do so. These need
not be special, but they're there, and they are expressed, and that is all that
they need.

### The desire to write

I want to write.

I like writing. I like exploring thoughts as they move into a permanent domain
from the transient confines of my mind. I like the honesty it brings out in me,
and the raw language of cognition that they expose.

And this, above all, settles it.

I will write.

## Why make it public

Where I talk about why I want to put it online for everyone to see.

This part is still a work in progress, as you can see, and will be edited over
time to give an accurate picture of my motivations.

I've struggled with the idea of writing publicly - the few things that I've
written publicly under my own name are fairly bland technical posts. It took me
a long while to come up with convincing arguments to write publicly, and then
only with a few caveats.

There's a lot of things I write about that I'd love to talk to people about, and
having public work is a way to signal interest and knowledge in the domain. It
is a great way to fill in gaps that I've seen, or problems that I've faced so
that they help others.

By writing publicly, I hope to learn to open myself up to criticism, and learn
from it. I will eventually want to write in large amounts, and learning this
skill now will be very useful in the future.

I could also show myself confidence in my thoughts by exposing them to the
proving grounds of public opinion.

Writing is the best way to have an impact on the world, and to spread my
thoughts and take part in our exercise in growth via discussion, debate and
dissent.

This will also provide a channel for me to talk about my interests, write
technical posts that I can link when people have issues that I've faced before,
to help people quickly gain context into my thoughts and opinions on a specific
topic at my best, without me having to explain them repeatedly with varying
levels of enthusiasm.

## Conclusion

Where I conclude, yes.

This blog is mostly for me, and a little for you. Anything you takeaway from
this is purely a bonus, from my perspective. Though eventually I hope to write
entirely for public consumption, this is not that effort, and is purely a way
for me to learn and expose this side of myself publicly, without the safety of
anonymity.

I hope to write here about things serious and trivial, technical and personal,
detailed and off the cuff.

A braver version of me would jump right in, and write about something a lot more
honest and personal, but I count it as a win that I started with an honest
exploration of my thoughts about public writing rather than an impersonal
technical post (which there will definitely be some of, along with opinionated
technical posts)
